# Autogenerate CRD Documentation

Autogenerate CRD documentation directly from code rather than maintain it manually. This approach reduces maintenance effort and ensures documentation stays in sync with code changes.

While you can choose any generator that suits your needs, prioritize solutions already tested and used across Kyma teams. Regardless of the tool you select, ensure the generated documentation adheres to the [Custom Resource Topic template](./02-docu-templates.md#custom-resource-topics) to maintain consistency across Kyma documentation.

## Kyma Table Generator (Recommended)

The table generator is the solution developed by the Kyma team. It allows you to generate one table with all the resource's parameters and add it to any document. 

For example, see [Telemetry](https://github.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/blob/main/docs/user/resources/01-telemetry.md?plain=1).

### Generate Documentation Tables 
For instructions on how to set up the tool and use it, see [The Table Generator](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma/blob/main/hack/table-gen/README.md).

## CRD Reference Documentation Generator

Some Kyma teams use the [crd-ref-docs](https://github.com/elastic/crd-ref-docs/tree/master) tool to autogenerate CRD documentation. Unlike the Kyma Table Generator, which creates a single table containing all fields, this tool generates multiple tables—one for each CRD schema. This structure allows direct linking to specific sections and makes it easier to navigate to where a particular schema is defined.

For example usage, see [Istio](https://github.com/kyma-project/istio/blob/main/docs/user/04-00-istio-custom-resource.md).

To update the CRD documentation, run `make generate-crd-docs`. The tool generates documentation based on Go struct field comments in the API types located in the `apis` folder.

### Generate Documentation Tables

1. Copy the `crd-ref-docs` folder from [istio/crd-ref-docs/](https://github.com/kyma-project/istio/tree/main/crd-ref-docs) to your module repository.

2. Add the following commands to the module's Makefile. 
    - `{FILE_PATH}` is the absolute path to the file in which the CRD documentation should be generated, for example, `docs/user/04-00-istio-custom-resource.md`.
    - `{OUTPUT_PATH}` is the absolute path to the API go file from which CRD documentation should be generated, for example, `apis/v2alpha1` or `apis/gateway/v2`.

    ```
    ########## Docs generation ###########
    bin/crd-ref-docs:
        mkdir -p bin
        wget "https://github.com/elastic/crd-ref-docs/releases/download/v0.2.0/crd-ref-docs_0.2.0_${OS_TYPE}_${OS_ARCH}.tar.gz" -O bin/crd-ref-docs.tar.gz 
        mkdir -p bin/crd-ref-docs-x
        tar -xzf bin/crd-ref-docs.tar.gz -C bin/crd-ref-docs-x
        rm bin/crd-ref-docs.tar.gz
        mv bin/crd-ref-docs-x/crd-ref-docs bin/crd-ref-docs
        rm -r bin/crd-ref-docs-x

    CRD_REF_DOCS_FLAGS = --max-depth=15 --renderer=markdown --config=crd-ref-docs/config.yaml --templates-dir=crd-ref-docs/templates

    .PHONY: generate-crd-docs
    generate-crd-docs: bin/crd-ref-docs
        ./bin/crd-ref-docs $(CRD_REF_DOCS_FLAGS) --output-path={OUTPUT_PATH} --source-path={SOURCE_PATH}
        sed -i'' -e 's/Optional: \\{\\}/Optional/g' {OUTPUT_PATH}
        sed -i'' -e 's/Required: \\{\\}/Required/g' {OUTPUT_PATH}
        sed -i'' -e 's/XIntOrString: \\{\\}/XIntOrString/g' {OUTPUT_PATH}
        rm {OUTPUT_PATH}-e
    ```

    To generate documentation from multiple CRDs located in different directories, repeat the generate-crd-docs section for each resource and add different source and output paths. See the [API Gateway Makefile](https://github.com/kyma-project/api-gateway/blob/main/Makefile#L278) for reference.

3. Open the `crd-ref-docs/templates/gv_list.tpl`, which contains overall structure of the custom resource document, including introductory text and sample custom resource. Adjust the text for your resource.

    For an example on how to generate documentation from multiple CRDs located in different directories, see the [API Gateway gv_list.tpl](https://github.com/kyma-project/api-gateway/blob/main/crd-ref-docs/templates/gv_list.tpl).

4. Add a workflow that checks if the autogenerated CRD file is up to date. For reference, see [check_manifests_generate.sh](https://github.com/kyma-project/api-gateway/blob/main/hack/check_manifests_generate.sh).

4. Run `make generate-crd-docs`.
